Journal of Scienti$c Explorutian, Vol. 1 1, No. 3, pp. 263-274, 1997 0892-33 10197 
O 1997 Society for Scientific Exploration 
Accessing Anomalous States of Consciousness with a Binaural 
Beat Technology 
F. HOLMES ATWATER 
The Monroe Institute, 62 Roberts Mountain Roud, Fuber, VA 22938-231 7 
Abstract - Exposure to binaural beats in an environment of restricted stim- 
ulation coupled with a guidance process can safely provide access to and ex- 
periences in many propitious states of consciousness. This method requires a 
unique combination of well-understood psycho-physiological inductive 
techniques with the addition of a refined binaural-beat technology. Binaural 
beats provide potential consciousness-altering information to the brain's 
reticular activating system. The reticular activating system in turn interprets 
and reacts to this information by stimulating the thalamus and cortex - 
thereby altering arousal states, attentional focus, and the level of awareness, 
i.e., the elements of consciousness itself. This effective binaural-beat 
process offers a wide variety of beneficial applications and vehicle for the ex- 
ploration of expanded states of consciousness. 
Keywords: consciousness - altered states 
Introduction 
The audio phenomenon known as binaural beating can be used to access al- 
tered states of consciousness. This is done through a process in which individ- 
uals in an environment of restricted stimulation willfully focus attention on a 
combination of multiplexed audio binaural beats that are mixed with music, 
pink sound', and/or assorted natural sounds. In most cases the process also in- 
cludes breathing exercises, guided relaxation, affirmation, and visualization. 
The binaural-beat element of the process appears to be associated with an 
electroencephalographic (EEG) frequency-following response in the 
 brain.2 
Many studies have demonstrated the presence of a frequency-following re- 
sponse to auditory stimuli, recorded at the vertex of the human brain (top of 
the head). This EEG activity was termed "frequency-following response" be- 
cause its period (cycles per second) corresponds to the fundamental frequency 
of the stimulus (Smith, Marsh, and Brown, 1975). Stated plainly, if the audio 
stimulus is 40 Hz the resulting measured EEG will show a 40 Hz frequency - 
-- -- 
 - 
' Pink sound is "white noise" (like the hiss sound from a television after a station has stopped trans- 
mitting) which has been equalized for human hearing. Lower-frequency components have been ampli- 
fied and higher-frequency components reduced to create a more pleasing natural sound. 
A frequency-following response to a binaural beat has been demonstrated by Oster (1973) and in the 
context of hearing-acuity research (Hink et al., 1980). 

=====PAGE=====
264 F. Holmes Atwater 
following response using appropriate time -domain averaging protocols. Bi- 
naural-beat stimulation, coupled with the effects of the other procedures with - 
in the process outlined above, appears to regulate neuronal activity and en - 
courage access to propitious mental states. The effectiveness of binaural beats 
in engendering state changes is supported by the consistent reports of thou- 
sands of users, as well as the documentation of physiological changes associ - 
ated with its use. 
The reported uses of this binaural-beat method for accessing propitious 
states of consciousness range from sensory integration (Morris, 1990), relax- 
ation, meditation, stress reduction, pain management, improved sleep (Wil- 
son, 1990; Rhodes, 1993), health care (Carter, 1993), enriched learning envi- 
ronments and enhanced memory (Kennerly, 1994) to creativity (Hiew, 1995), 
enhanced intuition, remote viewing 3 
 (McMoneagle, 1993), telepath y4, and 
out-of -body 
 e~perience.~ An understanding of the applied binaural -beat tech - 
nology involves the well- known autonomic effects of controlled breathing and 
progressive relaxation and the psychology of affirmations and visualizations 
(subjects not addressed in this paper). For the purposes of this paper, discus - 
sion is limited to the physiology of the brain, the brain -mind model, brain 
waves and their relationship to the behavioral psychology of consciousness, 
and the role of the reticular activating system (RAS) in regulating brain waves 
and consciousness. 
Binaural Beats and the Physiology of the Brain 
Binaural beats were discovered in 1839 by a German experimenter, H. W. 
Dove. The human ability to "hear" binaural beats appears to be the result of 
evolutionary adaptation. Many evolved species can detect binaural beats be- 
cause of their brain structure. The frequencies at which binaural beats can be 
detected change depending upon the size of the species' cranium. In the 
human, binaural beats can be detected when carrier tones6 are below 
approxi- 
-- 
- 
- 
- 
 - . . . . . . . . . ... . . 
- .. -. .. . -. . . -. . .. . .. 
 - 
-. . .- .- -. . 
"emote viewing is described as an ability to perceive locations remote in time or space by mental 
means alone. Remote viewers can describe and sketch locations and events beyond the range of the 
usual sensory input (cf. JSE, Vol. 10, No. 1 for several reports). 
Telepathy is commonly referred to as direct mind -to-mind communication without the aid of con- 
ventional external sensory input. Robert Monroe referred to this as nonverbal communication. 
The expressions "in" and 
"out-of-body" refer to individual awareness. In the out-of-body experi - 
ence, mind -consciousness does not separate from the human tissue as in death. One's mind is always ex- 
perienced as being either in or out of the body. It depends on where awareness is focused. Being out-of- 
body simply means that there is no direct connection to certain material levels of consciousness, 
including the normally unconscious activities of breathing and heart function which continue without 
one's attention. Being out-of-body is a consciousness experience with a shift of mind-consciousness 
and locale. Some enjoy this shift. Others become frightened that they may get lost and be unable to find 
their way back to their bodies. If one believes that the mind is in the brain, and one experiences what one 
believes is out-of-body awareness, it is easy to feel that one is too far from the "gas station" and that one 
can get stranded. But the mind is not the brain so there is no reason to fear. If one knows one is "out" one 
can always get back because there is some normally subconscious activity (respiration, heart beat, etc.) 
on the brain -material level to tether one back (Hunt, 1995). 
' Electronically produced binaural beats can be "heard" when audio tones of slightly different fre- 
quencies are presented one to each ear. These audio tones are referred to as carriers. 

=====PAGE=====
Binaural Beat Technology 265 
mately 1000 Hz (Oster, 1973). Below I000 Hz the wave length of the signal is 
longer than the diameter of the human skull. Thus, signals below 1000 Hz 
curve around the skull by diffraction. The same effect can be observed with 
radio wave propagation. Lower-frequency (longer wave length) radio waves 
(such as AM radio) travel around the earth over and in between mountains and 
structures. Higher-frequency (shorter wave length) radio waves (such as FM 
radio, TV, and microwaves) travel in a straight line and cannot curve around 
the earth. Mountains and structures block these high-frequency signals. Be- 
cause frequencies below 1000 Hz curve around the skull, incoming signals 
below 1000 Hz are heard by both ears. But due to the distance between the 
ears, the brain "hears" the inputs from the ears as out of phase with each other. 
As the sound wave passes around the skull, each ear gets a different portion of 
the wave. It is this phase difference that allows for accurate location of sounds 
below 1000 
HZ.~ Audio direction finding at higher frequencies is less accurate 
than it is for frequencies below 1000 Hz. At 8000 Hz the pinna (external ear) 
becomes effective as an aid to localization. Virtually all animal sounds are 
below 1000 Hz. It is easy to imagine why animals developed the ability to ac- 
curately detect the location of each others' sounds. The relevant issue here, 
however, is that it is this innate ability of the brain to detect a phase difference 
that enables it to perceive binaural beats. 
The sensation of "hearing" binaural beats occurs when two coherent sounds 
of nearly similar frequencies are presented, one to each ear, and the brain de- 
tects phase differences between these sounds. This phase difference normally 
provides directional information to the listener, but when presented with stereo 
headphones or speakers the brain integrates the two signals, producing a sen- 
sation of a third sound called the binaural beat. Perceived as a fluctuating 
rhythm at the frequency of the difference between the two (stereo left and 
right) auditory inputs, binaural beats appear to originate in the brain stem's su - 
perior olivary nucleus, the site of contralateral integration of auditory input 
(Oster, 1973). This auditory sensation is neurologically routed to the reticular 
formation (Swann et al., 1982) and simultaneously volume conducted to the 
cortex where it can be objectively measured as a frequency-following response 
(Oster, 1973; Smith, Marsh, and Brown, 1975; Marsh, Brown, and Smith, 
1975; Smith et al., 1978; Hink et al., 1980). The frequency-following re- 
sponse provides proof that the sensation of binaural beating has neurological 
efficacy. 
Binaural beats can easily be heard at the low frequencies (< 30 Hz) that are 
characteristic of the EEG spectrum (Oster, 1973; 
Atwater, 1997). This percep - 
tual phenomenon of binaural beating and the objective measurement of the 
frequency-following response (Oster, 1973; Hink et al., 1980) suggest condi - 
tions which facilitate alteration of brain waves and states of consciousness. 
There have been numerous anecdotal reports and a growing number of 
-- -- 
 - 
 - - - - 
 -- 
In the case of signals above 1000 Hz the skull blocks the signal from the lee -side ear. The source of 
the sound 
 1s then determined by the brain to be in the general direction of the loud noise, there being a 
lower amplitude heard by the lee -side ear. 

=====PAGE=====
266 F. Holmes Atwater 
research efforts reporting changes in consciousness associated with binaural- 
beats. Binaural beats in the delta (1 to 4 Hz) and theta (4 to 8 Hz) ranges have 
been associated with reports of relaxed, meditative, and creative states (Hiew, 
1995), sensory integration (Morris, 1990), and used as an aid to falling asleep 
(Wilson, 1990; Rhodes, 1993). Exposure to audio -guidance training using 
lower-frequency binaural beats in concert with cognitive therapy resulted in 
decreased depressive symptoms in alcoholic patients (Waldkoetter & Sanders, 
1997). Binaural beats in the alpha frequencies (8 to 12 Hz) have increased 
alpha brain waves (Foster, 1990) and binaural beats in the beta frequencies 
(typically 16 to 24 Hz) have been associated with reports of increased concen- 
tration or alertness (Monroe, 1985), improved memory (Kennerly, 1994), and 
increases in focused attention in mentally retarded adults (Guilfoyle & Car- 
bone, 1996). 
Passively listening to binaural beats may not automatically engender an al- 
tered state of consciousness. The process usually used when listening to bin- 
aural beats includes a number of procedures; binaural beats are only one ele- 
ment. We all maintain a psycho-physiological momentum, a homeostasis 
which may resist the influence of the binaural beats. These homeostatic states 
are generally controlled by life situations as well as by acts of will, both con- 
scious and subconscious. The willingness and ability of the listener to relax 
and focus attention or their level of practice in meditative processes may in 
some way contribute to binaural-beat effectiveness. Naturally occurring neu - 
rological ultradian rhythms, characterized by periodic changes in arousal and 
states of consciousness (Webb & Dube, 198 1 ; Rossi, 1986; 
 Shannahoff-Khal- 
sa, 1991), may underlie the anecdotal reports of fluctuations in the effective- 
ness of binaural beats. The perception of a binaural beat is said to be height- 
ened by the addition of masking noise to the carrier signal (Oster, 1973), so 
white or pink noise is often used as background. Practices such as humming, 
toning, breathing exercises, autogenic training, andlor biofeedback can also be 
used to interrupt the homeostasis of subjects resistant to the effects of binaural 
beats (Tart, 1975). 
Brain Waves and Consciousness 
Controversies concerning the brain, mind, and consciousness have existed 
since the early Greek philosophers argued about the nature of the mind-body 
relationship, and none of these disputes have been resolved. Modern neurolo- 
gists have located the mind in the brain and have said that consciousness is the 
result of electrochemical neurological activity. There are, however, growing 
observations challenging the completeness of these assertions. There is no 
neuro-physiological research which conclusively shows that the higher levels 
of mind (intuition, insight, creativity, imagination, understanding, thought, 
reasoning, intent, decision, knowing, will, spirit, or soul) are located in brain 
tissue (Hunt, 1995). A resolution to the controversies surrounding the higher 

=====PAGE=====
Binaural Beat Technology 267 
involve an epistemological shift to include extra-rational ways of knowing (de 
Quincey, 1994) and may well not be comprehended by neuro-chemical brain 
studies alone. Penfield (1 975), an eminent contemporary neuro-physiologist, 
found that the human mind continued to work in spite of the brain's reduced 
activity under anesthesia. Brain waves were nearly absent while the mind was 
just as active as in the waking state. The only difference was in the content of 
the conscious experience. Following Penfield's work, other researchers have 
reported awareness in comatose patients (Hunt, 1995), and there is a growing 
body of evidence which suggests that reduced cortical arousal while maintain - 
ing conscious awareness is possible (Fischer, 197 1 ; West, 1980; Delmonte, 
1984; Wallace, 1986; Goleman, 1988; Mavromatis, 199 1 ; Jevning, Wallace, 
and Beidenbach, 1992). These states are variously referred to as meditative, 
trance, altered, hypnagogic, hypnotic, and twilight-learning states (Budzynski, 
1986). Broadly defined, the various forms of altered states rest on the mainte- 
nance of conscious awareness in a physiologically reduced state of arousal 
marked by parasympathetic dominance (Mavromatis, 199 1). Recent physio - 
logical studies of highly hypnotizable subjects and adept meditators indicate 
that maintaining awareness with reduced cortical arousal is indeed possible in 
selected individuals as a natural ability or as an acquired skill (Sabourin, Cut- 
comb, Crawford, and Pribram, 1993). More and more scientists are expressing 
doubts about the neurologists' brain-mind model because it fails to answer so 
many questions about our ordinary experiences, as well as evading our mysti- 
cal and spiritual ones. Studies in distant mental influence and mental healing 
also challenge the notion of a mind localized within the brain (Dossey, 1994, 
1996a). Nonlocal events have been proven to occur at the subatomic level, and 
some researchers believe that the physics principles behind these events un- 
derlie nonlocal consciousness-mediated effects (Dossey, 1996a). conscious- 
ness-associated anomalies appear unrestricted by spatial or temporal bound- 
aries and many experiments have been done to shed light on this remarkable 
quality of the mind (Dossey, 1996b). The scientific evidence supporting the 
phenomenon of remote viewing alone is sufficient to show that mind-con- 
sciousness is not a local phenomenon 
 (McMoneagle, 1993). 
If mind-consciousness is not the brain, why then does science relate states of 
consciousness and mental functioning to brain-wave frequencies? There is no 
objective way to measure mind or consciousness with an instrument. Mind- 
consciousness appears to be a field phenomenon which interfaces with the 
body and the neurological structures of the brain (Hunt, 1995). One cannot 
measure this field directly with current instrumentation. On the other hand, 
the electrical potentials of the body can be measured and easily quantified. 
The problem here lies in oversimplification of the observations. EEG patterns 
measured on the cortex are the result of electro-neurological activity of the 
brain. But the brain's electro -neurological activity is not mind-consciousness. 
EEG measurements then are only an indirect means of assessing the mind -con- 
sciousness interface with the neurological structures of the brain. As crude as 

=====PAGE=====
268 F. Holmes Atwater 
this may seem, the EEG has been a reliable way for researchers to estimate 
states of consciousness based on the relative proportions of EEG frequencies. 
Stated another way, certain EEG patterns have been historically associated 
with specific states of consciousness. Although not an absolute, it is reason- 
able to assume, given the current EEG literature, that if a specific EEG pattern 
emerges it is probably accompanied by a particular state of consciousness. 
Binaural beats can alter the electrochemical environment of the brain allow- 
ing mind-consciousness to have different experiences. When brain waves 
move to lower frequencies and awareness is maintained, a unique state of con- 
sciousness emerges. Practitioners of the binaural -beat process call this state of 
hypnagogia "mind 
awakelbody asleep". Slightly higher frequencies can lead 
to hyper-suggestive states of consciousness. Still higher-frequency EEG states 
are associated with alert and focused mental activity needed for the optimal 
performance of many tasks. 
Perceived reality changes depending on the state of consciousness of the 
perceiver (Tart, 1975). Some states of consciousness provide limited views of 
reality, while others provide an expanded awareness of reality. For the most 
part, states of consciousness change in response to the ever-changing internal 
environment and surrounding stimulation. For example, states of conscious- 
ness are subject to influences like drugs and circadian and ultradian rhythms 
(Webb & Dube, 198 1 ; Rossi, 1986; Shannahoff-Khalsa, 199 1). Specific states 
of consciousness can also be learned as adaptive behaviors to demanding cir- 
cumstances (Green & Green, 1986). Binaural-beat technology offers access to 
a wide variety of altered-state experiences for those wanting to explore the 
realms of consciousness. 
Hemispheric Synchronization 
Many of the states of consciousness available through this technology have 
been identified as presenting unique hemispherically synchronized brain-wave 
frequencies. Although synchronized brain waves have long been associated 
with meditative and hypnagogic states, the binaural-beat process may be 
unique in its ability to induce and improve such states of consciousness. The 
reason for this is physiological. Each ear is "hardwired" (so to speak) to both 
hemispheres of the brain (Rosenzweig, 1961). Each hemisphere has its own 
olivary nucleus (sound -processing center) which receives signals from each 
ear. In keeping with this physiological structure, when a binaural beat is per- 
ceived there are actually two electrochemical synaptic waves of equal ampli- 
tude and frequency present, one in each hemisphere. This is, in and of itself, 
hemispheric synchrony of synaptic activity. Binaural beats appear to con- 
tribute to the hemispheric synchronization evidenced in meditative and hypna- 
gogic states of consciousness. Binaural beats may also enhance brain function 
by enabling the user to mediate cross-colossal connectivity at designated 

=====PAGE=====
Binaural Beat Technology 269 
The two cerebral hemispheres of the brain are like two separate information 
processing modules. Both are complex cognitive systems; both process infor- 
mation independently and in parallel; and their interaction is neither arbitrary 
nor continuous (Zaidel, 1985). Because of this, states of consciousness (mind- 
consciousness interfacing with the brain) can be defined not only in terms of 
brain-wave frequency ratios, but also in terms of hemispheric specialization 
and/or interaction. Some desired states of consciousness may require facile 
inter-hemispheric integration, while others may call for a unique hemispheric 
processing style. An individual's cognitive repertoire and, therefore, his abili- 
ty to perceive reality and deal with the everyday world, is subject to his ability 
to experience various states of consciousness (Tart, 1975). Binaural beats 
provide the tools for individuals to expand their ability to experience a wide 
range of mind-consciousness states. 
Each state of consciousness is not represented by one simple brain wave but 
involves a milieu of inner-mixing wave forms, a field effect. The reason for 
this lies in the structure of the brain itself. Not only is the brain divided hori- 
zontally into hemispheres, it is also divided vertically from the brain stem to 
the cerebellum, the thalamus, the limbic system, and the cerebral cortex. The 
cerebral cortex is further divided into such functional areas as the frontal 
lobes, the parietal lobes, the temporal lobes, and the occipital lobes. There are, 
of course, many other subdivisions of the brain which have not been men- 
tioned. The critical point is that for each discrete state of consciousness, 
mind-consciousness interfaces with each area of the brain and each area res- 
onates at a specific brain-wave frequency unique to that interface because it 
performs a localized function (Luria, 1970). 
Developing Effective Binaural Beats 
The process of developing effective stimuli relied initially on the feedback 
of those experiencing altered states while listening to binaural beats (Atwater, 
1997), and more recently with the aid of EEG technology. Originally, re- 
searchers tested many subjects under laboratory conditions for their responses 
to binaural-beat stimuli. Records were kept as to the effect each binaural-beat 
frequency had on these subjects. Then binaural beats were mixed and records 
were again kept on the subjects' responses. After months (in some cases, 
years), test results began to show population-wide similar responses to specific 
mixes of binaural beats. Certain complex, brain-wave-like combinations of 
binaural beats were reported more effective than other combinations, and 
more effective than binaural beats of single frequencies (sine waves). Effec- 
tive binaural beats are, therefore, unique in that they are designed to be com- 
plex brain-wave-like patterns rather than simple sine waves. (See Figures 1 

=====PAGE=====
270 F. Holmes Atwater 
2 Seconds 
Fi; 1. Complex Binaural Beat 
2 Seconds 
Fig. 2. Sine Wave Binaural Beat 
How Binaural Beats Alter States of Consciousness 
Two decades ago it was assumed that the mechanism behind the conscious- 
ness-altering effects of binaural beats was somehow related to entrainment of 
the auditory frequency-following response - a theorized process of nonlinear 
stochastic resonance of brain waves with the frequency of the auditory stimu- 
lus. Since an auditory frequency-following response could be measured at the 
cortex it seemed logical to assume that the underlying consciousness-altering 
mechanism must be some form of Newtonian entrainment process at work. 
Continuing research revealed, however, that there is no effect -mechanism to 
support the notion that entrainment of the auditory frequency-following re- 
sponse could occur or is responsible for alterations in consciousness. Compar - 
isons to photic entrainment models are not supported because the EEG signal 
strength of the measured auditory frequency-following response of binaural 

=====PAGE=====
Binaural Beat Technology 27 1 
beats is too low. At this point it is hard to even speculate that the neural activi- 
ty of the frequency-following response could, in some electromagnetically in- 
ductive way, alter ongoing brain-wave activity. 
A review of the appropriate literature reveals that brain waves and related 
states of consciousness are said to be regulated by the brain's reticular forma- 
tion stimulating the thalamus and cortex. The extended reticular-thalamic ac- 
tivation system (ERTAS) is implicated in a variety of functions associated 
with consciousness 
 (Newman, 1997). The word reticular means "net-like" 
and the neural reticular formation itself is a large, net-like diffuse area of the 
brainstem (Anch et al., 1988). The reticular activating system (RAS) inter- 
prets and reacts to information from internal stimuli, feelings, attitudes, and 
beliefs as well as external sensory stimuli by regulating arousal states, atten- 
tional focus, and the level of awareness - the elements of consciousness itself 
(Empson, 1986; Tice & Steinberg, 1989). How we interpret, respond, and 
react to information then, is managed by the brain's reticular formation stimu- 
lating the thalamus and cortex, and controlling attentiveness and level of 
arousal (Empson, 1986). "It would seem that the basic mechanisms underly- 
ing consciousness are closely bound up with the brainstem reticular system ..." 
(Henry, 1 992). 
In order to alter consciousness it is necessary to provide some sort of infor- 
mation input to the RAS. Binaural beats appear to influence consciousness by 
providing this 
informatiorz. The 
information referred to here includes the char- 
acter, quality, and traits of the state of consciousness of the complex, brain- 
wave-like pattern of the binaural beat (see Figure 2). These unique 
 binaural- 
beat wave forms (neurologically evidenced by the EEG frequency-following 
response) are recognized by the RAS as brain-wave pattern information. If in- 
ternal stimuli, feelings, attitudes, beliefs, and external sensory stimuli are not 
in conflict with this information (e.g., an internal, even unconscious, fear may 
be a source of conflict), the RAS will alter the state of consciousness as a nat- 
ural function of maintaining homeostasis 8 by regulating brain activity to syn- 
thesize the integrated binaural-beat stimulus (sensing it as a component of on- 
going neural activity). 
Without conflict, the RAS initiates replication of the character, quality, and 
traits of the neurologically evident and persistent binaural beating. As time 
passes, the RAS monitors both the internal and external environment and the 
state of consciousness itself (in terms of neural activity) to determine, from 
moment to moment, its suitability for dealing with existing conditions. As 
long as no conflicts develop, the RAS naturally continues aligning the listen- 
er's state of consciousness with the information in the brain -wave-like pattern 
of the binaural sound field. 
- 
-- 
 -- 
- 
-- 
- - ..- - 
 - 
 - 
The brain automatically and actively regulates all body functions to maintain homeostasis - an in- 
ternal equilibrium (Green & Green, 1977; Swann et al., 1982). In a nathral and constant attempt to 
maintain a homeostasis of the elements of consciousness, the RAS actively monitors and continues the 
neural replicat~on of ongoing brain-wave states (unless, of course, there is reason to make an adjustment 
due to new information from ~nternal sources or external sensory input). 

=====PAGE=====
272 F. Holmes Atwater 
In objective, measurable terms EEG-based research provides evidence of 
binaural beat's influence on consciousness. Since the RAS regulates cortical 
EEG (Swann, et al., 1982), monitoring EEG chronicles performance of the 
RAS. There have been several free-running EEG studies (Foster, 1990; 
Sadigh, 1990; Hiew, 1995, among others) which suggest that binaural beating 
induces alterations in EEG. Because the RAS is responsible for regulating 
EEG (Swann et al., 1982; Empson, 1986), these studies document measurable 
changes in RAS function during exposure to binaural beats. 
It is tempting to speculate about a neuro-physiological model underlying a 
binaural-beat-engendered state of consciousness labeled mind 
 awake/body 
asleep, a hypnagogic experience common to many. In this state, a greater pro- 
portion of lower frequency brain waves (theta and delta) have been recorded in 
the EEG. The "body asleep" part of this state may be tied to the increase in 
delta waves associated with hyper-polarization of thalamocortical cells (Steri- 
ade, 
 McCormick, and Sejnowski, 1993). The "mind awake" part of this state 
may be associated with theta frequencies in a portion of the hippo-campus. 
One is said to have achieved this state of mind-consciousness when a new con- 
dition of hypnagogic homeostasis is established and one becomes oblivious to 
the location of body extremities (hands, feet, etc.), still without losing con- 
sciousness (falling asleep). 
Summary 
The binaural-beat auditory -guidance process provides access to many bene - 
ficial mind-consciousness states. This process is a unique combination of 
well-understood psycho-physiological inductive techniques (restricted envi- 
ronmental stimulation, controlled breathing, progressive relaxation, affinna- 
tion, visualization, etc.) with the addition of a refined binaural-beat technolo- 
gy providing potential consciousness-altering information to the brain's 
reticular activating system. This safe and effective binaural-beat process offers 
a wide variety of applications which include, but are not limited to: relaxation, 
meditation, enhanced creativity, intuition development, enriched learning, im- 
proved sleep, wellness, and the exploration of expanded mind-cosciousness 
states. 
References 
Anch, A. M., Browman, C. P., Mitler, M. M. and Walsh, J. K. (1988). Sleep: A Scientific Perspec - 
tive. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, p. 96-97. 
Atwater, F. H. (1997). The Hemi-Sync process. http://www.Monroelnstitute.org/research/ 
Budzynski, T. H. (1986). Clinical applications of non-drug-induced states. In B. B. Wolman & M. 
Ullman (Eds.), Handbook of States of Consciousness, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold 
Company, 428. 
Carter, G. (1993). Healing Myself. Norfolk: Hampton Roads Publishing Company. 
de Quincey, C. (1994). Consciousness all the way down? Journal of Consciousness Studies, 1,2, 
217. 
Delmonte, M. M. (1984). Electrocortical activity and related phenomena associated with medita- 
tion practice: A literature review. International Journal of Neuroscience, 24, 217. 

=====PAGE=====
Binaural Beat Technology 273 
Dossey, L. (1994). Healing, energy, and consciousness: into the future or a retreat to the past? 
Subtle Energies, 5, 1, I. 
Dossey, L. (1996a). Dialogue. Subtle Energies, 5,3,264. 
Dossey, L. (1996b). Guest Column: Distance, time, and nonlocal mind: Dare we speak of the im- 
plications? Journal of ScientiJ'ic. Exploration, 10, 3,40 1. 
Empson, J. (1 986). Human Brc~inwctves: The 
Psycological Significance of the Electroencephalo - 
gram. London: The Macmillan Press Ltd. 
Fischer, R. (1971). A cartography of ecstatic and meditative states. Science, 174,4012, 897. 
Foster, D. S. (1990). EEG and subjective correlates of alpha frequency binaural beats stimulation 
combined with alpha biofeedback. Hemi -Sync Journal, 8,2, 1. 
Coleman, G. M. (1988). Meditative Mind: The Varieties 
 ofMeditative Experience. New York: G. 
P. Putnam. 
Green, E. E. & Green, A. M. (1986). Biofeedback and states of consciousness. In B. B. Wolman & 
M. Ullman (Eds.), Handbook of States of Consciousness, p. 553-589. New York: Van Nos- 
trand Reinhold Company. 
Guilfoyle, G. & Carbone, D. (1996). The facilitation of attention utilizing therapeutic sounds. 
Presented at the New York State Association of Day Service Providers Symposium, October 18, 
1996, Albany, New York. 
Henry, J. P. (1992). Instincts, Archetypes and Symbols: An Approach to the Physiology of Reli - 
gious Experience. Dayton: College Press. 
Hiew, C. C. (1995). Hemi-Sync into creativity. Hemi -Sync Journal, 13, I, 3. 
Hink, R. F., Kodera, K., Yamada, O., Kaga, K., and Suzuki, J. (1980). Binaural interaction of a 
beating frequency following response. Audiology, 19,36. 
Hunt, V. V. (1995). Infinite Mind: The Science of Human Vibrations. Malibu: Malibu Publishing 
Company. 
Jevning, R., Wallace, R. K., and Beidenbach, M. (1992). The physiology of meditation: Areview. 
A wakeful hypnometabolic integrated response. Neuroscience and Behavioral Reviews, 16, 
415. 
Kennerly, R. C. (1994). An Empirical Investigation into the Eflect of Beta Frequency Binaural 
Bectt Audio Signals on Four Measures of Human Memory. Department of Psychology, West 
Georgia College, Carrolton, Georgia. 
Luria, A. R. (1970). The functional organization of the brain. Recent Progress in Perception. 
San Francisco: W. H. Freeman and Company. 
Mavromatis, A. (1 991). Hypnagogia. New York: Routledge. 
McMoneagle, J. (1993). Mind Trek. Norfolk: Hampton Roads Publishing Company. 
Marsh, J. T., Brown, W. S., and Smith, J. C. (1975). Far-field recorded frequency -following re- 
sponses: Correlates of low pitch auditory perception in humans. Electroencephalography and 
Clinical Neurophysiology, 38, 1 13. 
Monroe, R. A. (1985). Far Journeys. New York: Doubleday. 
Morris, S. E. (1990). Hemi-Sync and the facilitation of sensory integration. Hemi -Sync Journal, 
8,4,5. 
Newman, J. (1997). Putting the puzzle together Part I: Towards a general theory of the neural cor- 
relates of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 4 , I, 47. 
Oster, G. (1973). Auditory beats in the brain. Scientific American, 229,94. 
Penfield, W. (1975). The Mystery ofthe Mind. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Rhodes, L. (1993). Use of the Hemi -Sync super sleep tape with a preschool -aged child. Hemi- 
Sync Journal, 1 l,4,4. 
Rosenzweig, M. R. (1 96 1 ). Auditory localization. In Perception: Mechanisms and Models. San 
Francisco: W. H. Freeman and Company. 
Rossi, E. L. (1 986). Altered states of consciousness in everyday life: The ultradian rhythms. In B. 
B. Wolman & M. Ullman (Eds.), Handbook of States of Consciousness, p. 97- 133. New York: Van 
Nostrand Reinhold Company. 
Sabourin, M. E., Cutcomb, S. E., Crawford, H. J., and Pribram, K. (1990). EEC correlates of hyp- 
notic susceptibility and hypnotic trance: Spectral analysis and coherence. International 
Journal of Psychophysiology, 10, 125. 
Sadigh, M. (1990). Effects of Hemi-Sync on electrocortical activity. 
 http://www.Monroelnsti- 
tute.org/research/ 
Shannahoff -Khalsa, D. (1991). Lateralized rhythms of the central and autonomic nervous sys- 

=====PAGE=====
274 F. Holmes Atwater 
Smith, J. C.. Marsh, J. T., and Brown, W. S. (1975). Far-field recorded frequency -following re - 
sponses: Evidence for the locus of brainstem sources. Electroencephalography and Clinical 
Neurophysiology, 39,465. 
Smith, J. C., Marsh, J. T., Greenberg, S., and Brown, W. S. (1978). Human auditory 
frequency -following responses to a missing fundamental. Science, 201,639. 
Steriade, M., 
McCormick, D. A., and Sejnowski, T. J. (1993). Thalamocortical oscillations in the 
sleeping and aroused brain. Science, 262,679. 
Swann, R., Bosanko, S., Cohen, R., Midgley, R., and Seed, K. M. (1982). The Brain - A User's 
Manual. p. 92. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. 
Tart, C. T. (1975). States of Consciousness. p. 72-73. New York: E. P. Dutton & Company. 
Tice, L. E. & Steinberg, A. (1989). A Better World, A Better You. p. 57-62. New Jersey: Prentice 
Hall. 
Waldkoetter, R. 0. & Sanders, G. 0. (1997). Auditory brain wave stimulation in treating alcoholic 
depression. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 84,226. 
West, M. A. (1980). Meditation and the EEG. Psychological Medicine, 10,369. 
Webb, W. B., & Dube, M. G. (1981). Temporal characteristics of sleep. In J. Aschoff (Ed.), Hand- 
book of Behavioral Neurobiology, p. 510-5 17. New York: Plenum Press. 
Wilson, E. S. (1 990). Preliminary study of the Hemi-Sync sleep processor. Colorado Association 
for Psychophysiologic Research. 
Zaidel, E. (1985). Academic implications of dual-brain theory. The Dual Brain. New York: The 
Guilford Press. 