THE MONROE INSTITUTE'S HEMI-SYNC PROCESS 
by 
F. Holmes Atwater 
About the author - F. Holmes Atwater is a college instructor, 
scientific investigator and behavioral engineer. He specializes 
in the design and application of methods for developing advanced 
human potentials. He has been a technical consultant to The Monroe 
Institute since 1977. 

=====PAGE=====
THE MONROE INSTITUTE’S HEMI-SYNC PROCESS 
HEMI-SYNC a patented auditory guidance system which is said 
to employ the use of sound pulses to induce a frequency following 
response (FFR)'in the human brain. It is reported that the HEMI- 
SYNC process can heighten selected awareness and performance 
while creating a relaxed state. HEMI-SYNC is more than this 
however, and an extensive evaluation is warranted. HEMI-SYNC 
involves the physics of resonant entrainment, brain waves and 
their relationship to the behavioral psychology of consciousness, 
and the physiology of the brain. 
The Physics of Entrainment: 
Resonant entrainment of oscillating systems is a well 
understood principle within the physical sciences. If a tuning 
fork designed to produce a frequency of 440hz is struck, causing 
it to oscillate, and then brought into the vicinity of another 
440hz tuning fork the second tuning fork will begin to oscillate. 
The first tuning fork is said to have entrained the second or 
caused it to resonate. There are three basic rules of the 
physics of entrainment. Resonate rule: For one oscillating 
system to be capable of entraining another the second system must 
be capable of achieving the same vibratory rate (oscillating 
frequency). An oscillating 440hz tuning fork will not entrain a 
300hz tuning fork because the second tuning fork will not vibrate 
at 440hz. The second basic rule involves power. Power rule: 

=====PAGE=====
2 
For one oscillating system to be capable of entraining another 
first must have sufficient power to overcome the homeostasis 
of the second. In the case of the tuning fork example, the first 
must be brought in close proximity to the second since the 
effective radiated power of the first diminishes with distance. 
The third rule involves consistency. Consistency rule* For one 
oscillating system to be capable of entraining another the first 
must be at a constant or fixed frequency. The tuning fork is an 
ideal example because it produces an oscillation of constant 
frequency and amplitude. This ideal condition is called a 
standing wave. 
The physics of entrainment apply to biosystems as well. 
What is of concern here are the electromagnetic properties called 
brain waves. The electrochemical activity of the brain results 
in the production of electromagnetic wave forms (brain waves) 
which can be objectively measured with sensitive equipment. 
Brain waves change frequencies based on neural activity within 
the brain. Because neural activity is electrochemical, brain 
function can be externally modified through the introduction of 
specific chemicals (mind altering drugs) or by altering the 
brain's magnetic environment (entrainment). Caffeine, nicotine, 
and alcohol are mine-altering drugs, whereas sunspots and 
heterodyning radio and microwave frequencies are entrainment 
environments. Beyond these obvious things the senses of sight, 
touch and hearing provide for easy access to the neural functions 
of the brain. Each of these senses responds to wave form 

=====PAGE=====
3 
activity within the surrounding environment and transmits 
information to the brain by means of electron pulse stimulation. 
The senses of taste and smell are generally not of practical use 
in entrainment due to their inherent low rate of pulse 
stimulation as well as the fact that their neural processing 
centers are found in lower brain centers and entrainment of these 
lower centers would have little effect on the rest of the brain. 
The senses of sight, touch and hearing by their very nature 
provide a fertile medium for entrainment of brain waves and, 
therefore, neural brain function. Manipulation of sense specific 
environments do in fact result in brain wave entrainment. A 
strobe light flashing at lOhz will entrain brain waves to that 
frequency.* When the brain's electromagnetic environment 
entrains to the lOhz, resultant psychological behaviors are 
evident. In a laboratory environment however, not every subject 
entrains to the lOhz strobe signal. To resolve this dilemma one 
must return to the basic rules of entrainment. For those 
subjects who do not entrain to the lOhz it would appear that the 
effective power level of the strobe signal at that frequency is 
insufficient given the physiological homeostasis of the subject. 
As in the case of the tuning forks, the electrochemical neuromas 
(the brain) must be capable of resonating at the desired 
entrainment frequency. Subjects who are displaying stable high 
*Tests have been conducted using different colors of strobes. 
Red seems to be the most effective color. Red stimulates more 
neural traffic and therefore a higher level of electrical 
activity which in turn saturates the brain's electromagnetic 
environment with the strobe frequency. 

=====PAGE=====
4 
amplitude brain waves at 26hz will tend to maintain homeostasis 
even when exposed to the lOhz strobe. 
What could cause such rigid stability? The brain responds 
to both chemical and electrical stimulation environments. Those 
environments are generally controlled by life's situations as 
well as acts of will both conscious and subconscious. The rigid 
26hz (beta) frequency may be the result of too much coffee, 
experiment anxiety, or the willful act of "not letting this 
strobe be in control.” That's not to say that the subjects who 
do get entrained are weak-willed. They have simply made the 
willful decision to let themselves be entrained. Techniques have 
been developed to overcome resistance to brain wave entrainment. 
In the above case, the resistant subjects could be coached to try 
and relax, given a sedative to break down the physiological 
homeostasis, or the strobe frequency can initially be brought to 
within 85% of the subjects state (26hz in this example) and then 
slowly moved to the desired frequency (lOhz in this example). By 
bringing the strobe frequency within 85% of the subject's state, 
its influential power (ability to entrain) is increased many 
times. If the strobe frequency were, for example, 50% of the 
subject's state it would not have any entrainment power and would 
fact act to maintain the subject's state as it resonates the 
half wave (harmonic) of the subject's state. Other practices 
such as humming (mantras, resonate tuning), autogenic training, 
and/or biofeedback can also be used to break down the homeostasis 
of resistant subjects (Tart,1975). 

=====PAGE=====
5 
The strobe entrainment effect involves only one of the 
sensory channels mentioned previously as being neural avenues 
capable of transporting entrainment signals. The kinesthetic 
sense of touch is another. In one interesting experiment a 
researcher set up a standing wave of a desired frequency in a 
water bed. The resultant tactile signals were effective in 
entraining the subject's brain waves to the selected frequency 
(Houck, 1984). In the case of HEMI-SYNC, the sense of hearing 
provides the neural avenues by which entrainment signals can be 
introduced into the electromagnetic cranial environment. The 
"frequency following response" of HEMI-SYNC is in fact the well 
established principle of entrainment. Sound pulses are used to 
entrain brain waves. 
Brain Waves and the Behavioral Psychology of Consciousness: 
One of the biggest criticisms of brain wave research is 
characterized by the popular notion that one can't tell what a 
person is thinking by measuring their brain wave patterns. By 
way of analogy this is like saying that one can't tell what 
information is in a computer by simply measuring voltages present 
at various points. There is probably some human resistance here 
to others to being able to "get inside one's head" and to know 
who one really is or what one is really thinking. A more 
realistic approach here would be to use a telephone as an 
analogy. A telephone has three "states of consciousness". 
State one is standby - the telephone just sits there waiting to 

=====PAGE=====
6 
be used. Slate two is ringing - the telephone is actively 
soliciting attention. State three is talking — the telephone is 
being used. All of these "states of consciousness" of the 
telephone can be determined by measuring the line voltage of the 
telephone wires. One does not have to have direct access to the 
telephone itself to know what it is doing. If there are 48 volts 
direct current present on the wires then the phone is in state 
one or standby. If there are 100 volts alternating current on 
the wires then the telephone is in state two or ringing. When 
there is a modulated 10 volt direct current on the phone wires 
then the telephone is in state three or being used (busy). These 
telephone states of consciousness are discrete in that the 
telephone can not be in more than one state at a time. It is 
either waiting, ringing, or busy. 
Measuring brain waves is somewhat similar to measuring 
telephone line voltage. When, through the measurement of line 
voltage, one determines the telephone is in use (state three) 
this does not reveal what is being said over the telephone. The 
same is true about brain waves. When, through the measurement 
of brain wave frequencies and associative patterns, it is 
detected that an individual is in REM sleep (dreaming) this does 
not reveal the dream content. This can only be discovered if the 
experimenter awakens the subject and asks him to describe his 
dream. 
But brain waves are more than just indicators of discrete 
states of consciousness. They represent the electrochemical 

=====PAGE=====
7 
environment through which perceived reality is manifest. 
Perceived reality changes depending on the state of consciousness 
of the perceiver (Tart,1975). Some states of consciousness 
provide limited views of reality while others provide an expanded 
awareness of reality. For the most part, states of consciousness 
change in response to immediate socio-environmental surroundings. 
(The psychologist would call these changes in ego states or 
subpersonalities.) As mentioned before, states of consciousness 
are subject to other influences as well. Such things as drugs 
and sunspots can alter states of consciousness. Additionally, 
all life forms appear to be subject to circadian and ultradian 
rhythms (Rossi, 1986).# Specific states of consciousness can 
also be learned as an adaptive behavior to demanding 
circumstances (Green and Green, 1986). 
HEMI—SYNC and the Physiology of the Brain: 
HEMI-SYNC's frequency following response (FFR) is applied 
through the use of a unique phenomena called binaural beats. 
Unlike the gross effect of strobe entrainment described 
previously, the FFR of HEMI-SYNC provides the user with access to 
and control of highly specific discrete states of consciousness. 
But before proceeding it is necessary to understand a little bit 
about what binaural beats are and are not. 
*Ultradian rhythms are psychophysiological processes involving 
alternating autonomic and brain functions that have a 90 to 100 
minute periodicity within the 24 hour circadian cycle. 

=====PAGE=====
8 
When two signals of different frequencies are mixed together 
what is known in electrophysics as a heterodyne effect takes 
place. As a result of heterodyning a complex signal is produced 
which includes both original frequencies, a signal at the sum of 
the original frequencies, and a signal at the difference between 
the original frequencies. To illustrate: 
A mix of a signal of lOOhz with a signal of 300hz will 
heterodyne into a complex wave form which, when 
examined contains signals at lOOhz (original), 200hz 
(difference), 300hz (original), and 400hz (sum). 
The heterodyne effect is used in radio technology to tune in 
various signals. In AM radio the incoming radio waves are 
heterodyned with an internal tuneable oscillator. The resultant 
difference between the two frequencies (called the beat frequency 
oscillation) is modulated by the sound heard coming from the 
radio. The heterodyne effect is a well understood principle in 
physics. The beat frequency oscillations which are produced by 
heterodyning signals are not the same as binaural beats. Beat 
frequency oscillations in the audio range are usually the result 
of electronically mixed (heterodyned) signals, are recordable by 
a second device (tape recorder, oscilloscope, etc.), and can be 
aurally detected with one ear. Binaural beats, on the other 
hand, are not the result of electronically mixed signals, are not 
recordable by device, and to be detected require the combined 
action of both ears. Binaural beats exist as a consequence of 
the interaction of perception within the brain (Oster, 1973). 
Binaural beats were discovered in 1839 by a German 

=====PAGE=====
9 
experimenter named H. W. Dove. The human ability to "hear” 
binaural beats appears to be the result of evolutionary 
adaptation. Many evolved species can detect binaural beats 
because of their brain structure. The frequencies at which 
binaural beats can be detected change depending on the size of 
the species' cranium. In the human, binaural beats can be 
detected when carrier waves are below about lOOOhz (Oster, 1973). 
Below lOOOhz the wave length of the signal is longer than the 
diameter of the human skull. This being so, signals below lOOOhz 
curve around the skull by diffraction. The same effect can be 
observed with radio wave propagation. Lower frequency (longer 
wave length) radio waves (like AM radio) travel around the earth 
over and in between mountains and structures. Higher frequency 
(shorter wave length) radio waves (like FM and TV) travel in a 
straight line and can't curve around the earth. Mountains and 
structures block these high frequency signals. Because sound 
frequencies below lOOOhz curve around the skull, incoming signals 
below lOOOhz are heard by both ears.* But, due to the distance 
between the ears, the brain "hears" the inputs from the ears as 
out of phase with each other. As the sound wave passes around 
the skull each ear gets a different portion of the wave. It is 
this wave—form phase difference which allows for accurate 
*In the case of signals above lOOOhz the skull blocks the signal 
from the lee side ear. The source of the sound is then 
determined by the brain to be in the general direction of the 
loud noise, there being little or no noise in the lee side ear. 

=====PAGE=====
10 
location of sounds below lOOOhz. Direction finding at higher 
frequencies is less accurate than it is for frequencies below 
lOOOhz, until about 8000hz when the pinna (external ear) becomes 
effective as an aid to localization (Oster, 1973). Virtually all 
animal sounds are below lOOOhz. It is easy to imagine why higher 
animals developed the ability to accurately detect the location 
of each others9 sounds.* The relevant issue here, however, is 
that it is this innate ability of the brain to detect wave form 
phase differences which gives rise to binaural beats. When 
signals of two different frequencies are presented through 
headphones, one frequency to one ear and another frequency to the 
other ear, the signals do not heterodyne (as described before) 
nor produce a beat frequency oscillation. What does happen is 
the brain detects phase differences between these signals. Under 
natural circumstances a detected phase difference would provide 
directional information to the higher centers of the brain. But 
with headphones on there is a totally different situation. 
Within the sound processing centers of the brain, pulse 
stimulation provides relevant information to the higher centers 
of the brain. In the case of a wave form phase difference the 
electron pulse rate in one part of a sound processing center 
*As an interesting alternative, some birds are ventriloquial 
They produce bird song which conceals their true location by 
presenting a false sonic local through wave form phase 
alteration. 

=====PAGE=====
11 
is greater than in another. The differences in electron pulse 
stimulation within the sound processing centers of the brain are 
an anomaly. This anomaly (the difference in electron pulse 
stimulation) comes and goes as the two different frequency wave 
forms mesh in and out of phase. As a result of these constantly 
increasing and decreasing differences in electron pulse 
stimulation, an amplitude modulated standing wave (the binaural 
beat) is generated within the sound processing centers of the 
brain itself. It is this standing wave which acts to entrain 
brain waves - the frequency following response (FFR) of HEMI- 
SYNC. It is important to grasp the fact that no one ever hears 
binaural beats. One only thinks something is heard. 
Additionally, the production of an amplitude modulated standing 
wave is dependent on the ability of the electrochemical cellular 
structure of brain tissues to resonate. Brain tissues do 
resonate as evidenced by the manifestation of electromagnetic 
brain waves. These brain waves are generally confined to 
frequencies below about 30hz. The same is true for binaural 
beats. Experimental subjects do not report "hearing" binaural 
beats above about 30hz (Oster, 1973). 
Beyond the Basics: 
The term HEMI—SYNC was chosen because many of the states of 
consciousness available through this technology are the result of 
wave forms of equal amplitude and frequency in both hemispheres 
of the brain. The reason for this is physiological. Each ear is 

=====PAGE=====
12 
"hard—wired" (so to speak) to both hemispheres of the brain 
(Rosenzweig, 1961)« Each hemisphere has its own olivary nucleus 
(sound processing center) which receives signals from each ear* 
In keeping with this physiological structure, when a binaural 
beat is present there are actually two standing waves of equal 
amplitude and frequency present, one in each hemisphere. The two 
separate standing waves entrain each hemisphere to the same 
frequency. 
The complexities of an effective HEMI-SYNC signal are 
amazing. Each state of consciousness is not represented by one 
simple brain wave. Each state of consciousness involves a milieu 
of inner mixing of wave forms. The reason for this lies in the 
structure of the brain itself. Not only is the brain divided 
into hemispheres, it is also divided vertically into the 
cerebellum, the thalamus, the limbic system, and the cerebral 
cortex. The cerebral cortex is further divided into such 
functional areas as the frontal lobes, the parietal lobes, and 
the occipital lobes* There are of course many other subdivisions 
the brain not mentioned here. The point is that for each 
discrete state of consciousness each area of the brain resonates 
at a specific brain wave frequency because it preforms a 
localized function (Luria, 1970). To entrain a particular state 
of consciousness then, one must identify these complex wave forms 
and mimic them through the use of binaural beats, multiplexed 
carrier signals, and heterodyned binaural beats* This is the 
HEMI—SYNC process* 

=====PAGE=====
13 
The Monroe Institute has been identifying these states of 
consciousness and developing HEMI-SYNC signals for almost two 
decades. The process of developing effective HEMI-SYNC signals 
has been as complex as the function of the brain itself. Under 
laboratory conditions many subjects were tested for their 
responses to binaural beats. Records were kept as to the effect 
each binaural beat frequency had on these subjects. Then 
binaural beats were mixed and records were again kept on the 
subjects9 responses. After many months (in some cases, years), 
test results began to show population—wide similar responses to 
specific mixes of binaural beats, which laid the foundation for 
what is now called HEMI-SYNC (Monroe, 1982). The individual 
kinaural beats within these unique mixes entrained separate areas 
the braxn to different frequencies, effectively producing 
discrete states of consciousness. In the case of the state of 
consciousness coined Focus 10 (mind awake, body asleep) for 
example, the cerebellum, which works below the level of 
consciousness and deals with muscles and body functions, must be 
entrained to a delta frequency. Under these conditions (a delta 
brain wave within the cerebellum) the body is asleep. The ”mind 
awake” half of Focus 10 is achieved by entraining the cerebral 
cortex to a low beta frequency. The subject's exposure to these 
individual binaural beats is timed, introducing the delta 
cerebellum signal first and later mixing in the low beta cerebral 
cortex signal. The mixing of these two binaural beats produces a 
complex HEMI-SYNC signal. This Focus 10 HEMI-SYNC signal also 

=====PAGE=====
14 
seems to have a soothing entrainment effect on the limbic system 
(brain’s emotional center) as evidenced by the many subjects who 
report that Focus 10 is a very pleasant experience. A subject is 
said to have achieved Focus 10 when a new condition of 
homeostasis is established (evidenced by appropriate brain wave 
patterns) and the subject becomes unaware of the location of body 
parts (hands, feet, etc.), still without losing consciousness 
(falling asleep). 
The HEMI-SYNC process is available outside the laboratory 
through the use of prerecorded stereo cassette tapes and a HEMI- 
SYNC synthesizer (Monroe, 1985). These tapes and the synthesizer 
offer many HEMI-SYNC environments sometimes involving the use of 
as many as six individual binaural beat frequencies. 
Through the use of HEMI-SYNC audio tapes and the synthesizer one 
can explore different states of consciousness, determine their 
benefit, and learn to attain these states at will - without the 
use of equipment. 
The Cross Callosal Mediation Benefits of HEMI-SYNC: 
HEMI-SYNC is but one tool which is effective for the 
attainment of desired states of consciousness. The disciplines 
of psychodrama, Assagioli's psychosynthesis, yoga, and others are 
all effective in breaking down the homeostasis of dysfunctional 
states of consciousness and the establishment of new perspectives 
of reality. HEMI-SYNC is unique in its contribution to brain 
function. HEMI-SYNC can actually enhance the effectiveness of 

=====PAGE=====
the brain by enabling the user to mediate cross callosal 
connectivity at designated brain wave frequencies. 
The two cerebral hemispheres of the brain are like two 
separate information processing modules. Both are complex 
cognitive systems, both process information independently and in 
parallel and their interaction is neither arbitrary nor 
continuous (Zaidel, 1985). Because of this, states of 
consciousness can be defined not only in terms of brain wave 
frequency but also in terms of hemispheric specialization and/or 
interaction. Some desired states of consciousness may require 
facile inter-hemispheric integration, while others may call for a 
unique hemispheric processing style (Zaidel, 1986). One's 
cognitive repertoire and therefore his ability to perceive 
reality and deal with the everyday world is subject to his 
ability to control his states of consciousness (including the 
mediation of interhemispheric processing). As stated before, 
states of consciousness are subject to change in response to 
immediate socio-environmental surroundings as well as drugs and 
sunspots. Hemispheric dominance in particular has an ultradian 
periodicity (Rossi, 1986). Individuals can, however, learn to 
control hemispheric dominance through the disciplines of 
biofeedback, yogic breathing, and others (Budzynski, 1986). But 
HEMI—SYNC is the only method of learning to control both 
hemispheric specialization and/or interaction and brain wave 
frequencies. The result of such control is the maximizing of the 
effectiveness of the human brain, or, put another way, the 

=====PAGE=====
16 
effective employment of appropriate states of consciousness to 
state specific environments or situations. 
HEMI—SYNC binaural beats can be generated to either 
facilitate interhemispheric integration or facilitate left/right 
hemispheric dominance. If a state of consciousness is desired 
which requires interhemispheric processing, then conventional 
HEM—SYNC binaural beats are used. As explained previously, a 
conventional binaural beat generates two amplitude modulated 
standing waves, one in each hemispherefs olivary nucleus. Such 
binaural beats will entrain both hemispheres to the same 
frequency establishing equivalent electromagnetic environments 
and maximizing interhemispheric neural communication (Edrington 
and Panagiotides, 1984). The process is much like tuning 
(impedance matching) oscillators. When two oscillators are tuned 
to the same frequency information and energy pass freely between 
them. With conventional HEMI-SYNC binaural beats the standing 
waves are in phase and synchronous in both hemispheres (hence the 
name HEMI—SYNC) and information passes freely between them. 
Specific states of consciousness which are attainable with 
conventional HEMI—SYNC binaural beats include those states which 
require cross callosal interhemispheric processing. 
If a state of consciousness is desired which requires 
hemispheric specialization or dominance or hemispheric 
entrainment to different brain waves, then unconventional HEMI- 
SYNC binaural beats are used. An unconventional HEMI-SYNC 
binaural beat is one in which the amplitude modulated standing 

=====PAGE=====
17 
wave in one (selected) hemisphere is attenuated. This is 
possible, fortunately, by virtue of the physiology of the brain. 
The acoustic nerve fibers form each ear are unequally divided 
between the hemispheres. From each ear more nerve fibers (more 
pulse stimulation) go to the opposing hemisphere than to the 
local hemisphere (Luria, 1970). To attenuate a binaural beat 
standing wave in the left hemisphere one must reduce the volume 
of the HEMI-SYNC signal in the right ear. The converse is, of 
course, also true. The reason this will reduce the standing wave 
in the opposing hemisphere is because there are more nerve fibers 
leading to the opposing hemisphere and the reduction in volume 
(less pulse stimulation) will have more effect there. Through 
the application of this same principle, HEMI-SYNC entrainment 
amplitude modulated standing waves of different frequencies can 
be established in the different hemispheres. Specific states of 
consciousness which are attainable with unconventional HEMI-SYNC 
binaural beats include those states which require hemispheric 
specialization or dominance. 
Conclusion; 
An extensive evaluation of HEMI-SYNC has shown that HEMI- 
SYNC provides a highly selective entrainment vehicle within the 
brain itself. The selectivity of this vehicle can provide the 
user with a variety of states of consciousness and the fact that 
the vehicle operates within the brain itself insures its 
effectiveness. 

=====PAGE=====
The Monroe Institute can be contacted by writing to TMI, 
Route 1, Box 175, Faber, VA 22938 or telephone <804) 361-1252. 

=====PAGE=====
REFERENCES 
Assagioli, R. Psychosynthesis. New York: Penguin Books, 1984 
Budzynski, T. H. Clinical Applications of Non-Drug—Induced 
States. Handbook of States of Consciousness. B. Holman and M. 
Ullman (Eds.). New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1986. 
Edrlngton, D. and Panagiotides, H. (1984). CEEG Response to 
Auditory Stimuli!. Unpublished raw data. 
Green, E. E. and Green, A. M. Biofeedback and States of 
Consciousness. Handbook of States of Consciousness. B. Holman 
and M. Ullman (Eds.). New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1986. 
Houck, G. B. Entrainment Techniques. Unpublished research, 
McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, Huntington Beach, CA, 
Luria, A. R. The Functional Organization of the Brain. Recent 
Progress in Perception. San Francisco: H. H. Freeman and 
Company, 1970. 
Monroe, R. A. The HEMI—SYNC Process. Monroe Institute Bulletin, 
Nellysford, VA, 1982, #PR31380H. 
Monroe, R. A. HEMI-SYNC Synthesizer. Breakthrough. Faber, VA: 
Monroe Institute of Applied Sciences, 1985. 
Oster, G. Auditory Beats in the Brain. Scientific American. 
1973, (4)229, 94-102. -— 
Rosenzweig, M. R. Auditory Localization. Perception: 
Mechanisms and Models. San Francisco: H. H. Freeman and 
Company, 1961. 
Rossi) E. L. Altered States of Consciousness in Everyday Life: 
The Ultradian Rhythms. Handbook of States of Consciousness. B. 
Holman and M. Ullman (Eds.). New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
Tart, C. T. States of Consciousness. New York: E. P. Dutton & 
Co., Inc., 1975, 31, 72-73. 
Zaidel, E. Academic Implications of Dual-Brain Theory. The Dual 
Braiin. New York: The Guilford Press, 1985. 
Zaidel, E. Callosal Dynamics and Right Hemisphere Language. Two 
Hemispheres - One Brain: Functions of the Corpus Callosum. 1986, 